This is Daryl Lane.
And this is Bill Vernon.
And we'll be talking with some prominent authors about the New Wave in science fiction.
The New Wave, which began in the mid-1960s, was simply a New Wave writing science fiction.
Yes, and that newness was seen in many areas.
There was often something unusual, for instance, about the style.
Character and psychology were given much more emphasis.
And also the New Wave treated themes such as sex and religion that science fiction hadn't really touched before.
Right.
And the authors who wrote about these themes were interested in changing the traditional science fiction formulas
which had been around since the pulp era of the 1920s, 30s, and 40s.
You know that type of story.
It's one in which science is glorified and the hero rescues earth from hordes of menacing, bug-eyed monsters.
Frederick Paul, who's been an author, an editor, and an agent in the field of science fiction,
has a few things to say about that change.
New Wave was an attempt, I guess, 15 years ago or more of a number of writers to break away from the traditional kinds of science fiction.
In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction anymore.
They didn't want to call it speculative fiction or call it nothing at all.
And they were interested primarily in writing about interspaces rather than outer space,
and secondarily, a lot of them in things like the drug culture and rock music and so on.
But in the rather bitter internal struggle that went on in science fiction,
a lot of people take sides one way or the other.
I think everyone was deeply affected.
We'll need to remember here that New Wave wasn't really a planned and deliberate movement by a unified group of writers.
One of the principal proponents of the New Wave, author Norman Spinrad,
believes it was just a bunch of diverse writers doing their own thing.
It was an old way, but there was never as a coherent philosophy in school of science fiction,
but there was never a New Wave in the same sense.
There were a lot of ways.
There were a lot of different people doing a lot of different things.
The people that were identified as New Wave were very diverse.
What I was actually writing is very different to what Tom Dish was writing, or Boulard, or Zalazny and Delaney,
were also identified as New Wave writers.
This stuff is much more, you know, Zalazny and Delaney and myself and Boulard and all this and Mike.
We were all, there were more differences between our work than between our work taking us to the talkality and the old stuff.
There was more difference within the so-called New Wave than there was within the so-called old wave.
But Spinrad also thinks the New Wave was tightly connected to what was happening in society.
And of course this mirrored the cultural appointment at the time.
It mirrored what was happening politically, it mirrored what was happening in music, it mirrored what was happening in movies.
It was a phenomenon that went through the western civilizations, a whole.
Some authors maintain that the New Wave is now dead.
Five-time Hugo winner Larry Niven, the author of Ring World, thinks there's a good reason for its demise.
The New Wave is a very persuasive thing and very easy to use to justify bad stories.
I think that's what killed it.
Not that increased characterization and experiments with typography and story format are a bad thing in themselves,
but it's so easy to use New Wave to justify a bad story.
It was bound to collapse.
That may be so, but lots of others feel that the influence of the New Wave is still around, though its presence isn't as intense as before.
It's left its mark on the field, no doubt about that.
Science fiction has been broadened, maybe enhanced somehow because of it.
Frederick Paul states it well.
And the New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old dinosaurs like Asimov and Heinlein and Meeth,
that there were nontraditional ways of constructing a novel.
See, most of us had grown up when science fiction was in the pulp magazines,
and most of it was written according to some variant of the pulp formula.
It turned out that wasn't necessary.
And I think the New Wave is responsible for teaching us that.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane and David Kershan.
Of all the themes handled by science fiction authors,
that of alien contact has been one of the most consistently popular and fascinating.
For a good reason, too.
Aliens have always been one of the biggest attractions of science fiction.
Whether they be the hostile bug-eyed monsters of the old pulp magazines
or the friendly creatures of close encounters of the third kind.
And they become even more fascinating when you find them in what some people call a first contact story.
First contact, as the term implies, describes the very first meeting between humans and an alien species.
In the past, stories of alien contact were usually written as thrillers,
with the sole and simple intention of scaring readers.
H.G. Wells' The War of the Worlds is probably the best example of that type of story.
But that's changed.
Many contemporary writers have provided more thoughtful treatments of aliens,
deepening the realism and the significance of narratives of alien contact.
Of course, before you can have a story of alien contact, you must first have some aliens.
One of the most provocative descriptions of aliens in all of science fiction
is found in Larry Niven's and Jerry Pranell's The Mote in God's Eye,
considered by many to be the finest of all first contact stories.
The success of this book is largely due to the unique and ingenious aliens, the Motees,
the Niven created for the story.
It's interesting, though, that Niven says he doesn't really create aliens for a story,
but suggests that it's the other way around.
But I always design aliens for themselves.
I almost never design an alien to match a story.
The story, some story, will eventually include the alien.
The alien stands for itself.
There are two particularly fascinating things that Niven incorporated into these Motees.
One is the fact that they are not symmetrical.
They have a head, torso, legs, and arms, as humans do,
but the arms are disproportionate.
One is small and thin, and the other is large and powerful.
Right. Niven says he took that idea from studying the structures of living creatures on Earth.
In that case, I had the idea that I was following a progression with a protozoan with an amoeba.
You get radial symmetry inside and out.
You move up a goodly distance, and you find starfishes with radial symmetry on the outside
and bilateral symmetry on the inside.
You move up a little further, and you find flat worms and worms of all stents.
At the level of bilateral symmetry inside and out.
Go as far as a human, and you find bilateral symmetry on the outside,
and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside.
The lungs look symmetrical, the kidneys look symmetrical,
the intestines look like somebody dropped a plate of spaghetti.
I tried to move on to the next step,
bilaterally unsymmetrical on the outside,
and I got the original Motee, which was the engineer's one.
The other ingenious idea Niven developed for the Motees is the way they construct and use machines.
They're highly skilled tool users, but they have no standard pre-manufactured machines, parts, or tools.
They simply alter or reshape whatever they find around them at the time to suit their needs.
And Niven says that particular idea just came to him.
It seemed interesting and even logical.
I was just playing with the ideas at that point, and that one seemed like a fun one.
It also seemed likely enough, if you've got a critter with not much intelligence
except in the direction of toolmaking and tool altering, then why not?
The thing has to keep testing its ability, or it will lose it.
It might as well be designing something every time it needs a specific machine.
Besides the ingenuity Niven demonstrated in creating the Motees,
he and Purnell also used some unexpected twists into the first contact theme.
A reader interested in alien contact cannot afford to overlook the Motee in God's eye.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz. Today we begin an interview with author Larry Niven.
Even a casual reader of science fiction, if asked to name his favorite authors,
would almost certainly mention the name of Larry Niven.
Niven's popularity rests on a solid and extensive body of work,
but one particular novel seems to have captivated science fiction fans.
That casual reader who named Niven as one of his favorite authors would likely pick Ringworld as Niven's finest work.
The Ringworld is an immense ring, large enough to hold three million Earths.
It has a thousand mile high wall on each side to hold in its atmosphere.
It has continents and oceans.
The Ringworld contains trillions of inhabitants of different species
and derives energy from the sun at its center.
Niven recalls where he obtained the idea for such a fantastic structure.
Suddenly I ran across an article about Dyson Spears.
A picture of that is a golf ball 93 million miles in radius with a sun at the center.
And gravity generators all around the outside so he would live on the inside,
terraforming it with oceans and soil and air.
I ran across that and I didn't like it. I thought it could be improved.
And I wound up with the Ringworld.
Readers were fascinated with the Ringworld.
So fascinated in fact that they studied the science behind it
and wrote to Niven about what seemed to be errors or inconsistencies in the theory
and design of the immense artifact.
Column errors and elaborations because some of them don't really fit the errors.
It's just something that hadn't gotten into the original book.
One of the errors was spotted by some MIT students.
It had to do with the instability of the Ringworld.
I suspect that the Ringworld was unstable and I suspect that you need attitude jets.
I was sure that the Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit
Blizzard RAM jets to be used as attitude jets,
which means you don't have a fuel problem at all.
You're burning the solar wind.
But rapidly some MIT people demonstrated that the Ringworld was unstable
and they were chanting it in the hall at the next Worldcon.
The Ringworld is unstable. The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the instability
and they are horrifying.
A major solar flare would have the Ringworld grinding against its sun in five years.
Well, I worked it into a plot. That was one elaboration or error.
Even teenage readers analyzed his Ringworld with a critical scientific eye.
A high school class in Florida got to work on the Ringworld.
And their conclusion was that the Ringworld's worst problem is that all the top soil would wind up in the oceans in about 3,000 years.
There are no earthquakes on the Ringworld. No mountain building forces.
But in a sequel, Ringworld engineers Niven attempted to correct such deficiencies.
He devised a way to answer the criticism of the Florida high schoolers.
Okay, that's a tough one. I set up a spill pipe system that runs the top, that runs the sea bottom mark from the sea bottoms
under the Ringworld and up over the edge of the Ringwall.
That even allows you some mind accumulation of useful metals.
Fan response of that sort caused Ringworld engineers to be written.
And although Niven once said he wouldn't write any more in the known space series,
the body of stories to which Ringworld belongs, he's not so sure any more.
I've given up saying that the known space series is dating. There's just no point in it.
I've written five books worth of known space stories since I said that.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
We'll see you soon with Terry Niven on our next show.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz. Today we continue our interview with author Larry Niven.
Author Larry Niven has produced a body of science fiction that has made him one of the best selling authors in the field.
A fairly large portion of his work falls into the known space series,
a group of stories and novels with a consistent chronology and overall evolving pattern to them.
Such a series is called a Future History.
Niven believes there are some peculiar attractions a Future History has for a science fiction author.
There had been Future Histories around, Poole Anderson and Robert Heinlein.
And I tell you, I guess we each evolved the idea somewhat independently.
And the idea is that if you carved out a consistent, workable future,
it seems a shame to waste it on one story.
You put it in the background because you want the background of a story to seem bigger than it is.
So there are things that are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why you go with it?
And if you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story
and allows you to elaborate on that background, sometimes you fall in love with the background.
And presently you've got a bunch of stories that link.
Ringworld is probably the best known story in Niven's Future History,
but he's also written some best selling books that fall outside his known space series.
Two of these, The Moat in God's Eye and Lucifer's Hammer, were written in collaboration with Jerry Pornell.
Collaboration for a creative writer presents some problems.
How is the work divided up, for instance?
Is it hard to decide who writes what?
Hard sometimes, but it always resolves.
The question is who is most qualified to write a given scene that we have both decided needs writing?
Before we start, we have the novel all laid out.
We know what's going on virtually everywhere.
And if we don't, it feels like we do.
And if we find out we don't, we elaborate as we get to that section.
Okay, the next question is who is qualified to write a given scene?
Sometimes it's obvious.
If we're dealing with a madman, he's mine.
If we're dealing with military operations, it's Jerry's.
Aliens are generally mine.
Politics is generally Jerry's.
Knowledge of history generally Jerry's.
And a real evil son of a bitch Jerry usually creates him.
And I usually run with him afterwards.
But Niven resists classification, either as an author of future histories or as a collaborator.
He sometimes branches out into seldom entered areas of science fiction.
One of these areas is humor, something few science fiction writers attempt.
What does he think his most successful piece of humor is?
I suppose I could name, oh, man of steel, woman of queen eggs, which has gotten me the most laughs.
I suppose everybody seems to have read it.
And those who haven't have heard about it are cocktail parties.
Niven's ready eye for humor can also be appreciated as he reveals that he's detected one of his own alien creations
from Ringworld, a disguised Pearson's puppeteer here on Earth.
I have reason to suspect the fair puppeteers on Earth.
Look at the characteristics.
Forget the shape.
They must be masters of biology to hide that peculiar three-legged two-headed shape.
But consider their characteristics.
They are cowards.
That is, they want everything utterly safe.
No corners on anything.
Everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world.
They don't even keep their world near a sun.
Regarding it is a runaway fusion reactor, which of course it is.
So, desperate regard for safety, they plus an urge to meddle in the lifestyles of other species.
Driving urge to meddle with practically no restraints attached.
What does that remind you of?
It seems nearly certain to me that Ralph Nader is a Pearson's puppeteer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show